We now look at a different Greedy Algorithm
with a slightly more complicated proof of
correctness. So, the problem we are looking
at is called Minimizing Lateness.
So, like our interval scheduling problem in
the last example, we have a single resource
and there are n request to use this resource.
So, now unlike the earlier situation where
we had a start time and a finish time and
the resource had to be scheduled within this
time. Here we just know that each request
i requires time t of i to complete and each
request i comes with a deadline d of i, here
we are going to schedule every request.
So, each request j will started at time start
of j, it is called s j and it will time take
t j, so it will end at f of j, the finish
time of j which will be the start time plus
the time it takes to process request j. Now,
if this finish time is bigger than the deadline,
then it is late, so the amount that it is
late is given by the difference between the
delay and the finish time and the goal is
to find a schedule which minimizes the maximum
lateness. So, we want to minimize the maximum
value of this l j over all the jobs j.
So, since we know we are looking for greedy
strategies, let us try and suggest some greedy
strategies for this problem. So, suppose we
want to finish jobs as quickly as possible,
so we choose a shortest job first, so we choose
jobs in increasing order of length. So, this
could be a greedy strategy, but unfortunately
there is a fairly simple counter example.
So, suppose we have 2 jobs job 1 takes 1 time
unit and job 2 takes 10 time units, but the
deadlines are 110 and 10 respectively.
In other words, the first job has a very long
gap within which it can be scheduled without
any penalty, whereas this second job has to
finish more or less assuming it starts initially.
So, now if you pick this shortest job then
we are going to incur a lateness of 1, because
we are going to go from 1 and then we are
going to go from 2 to the 11. So, the second
job is going to finish 1 unit of time late,
on the other hand if we do 1 to 10 then we
do 11, then we get no lateness, we get lateness
0. So, here picking the shortest job first
does not give us the best answer.
So, the second strategy might be to pick those
jobs, so earlier we saw that we had a job
which had 10 time units and it will also need
it had a deadline of 10. So, we need to pick
those jobs perhaps whose time is closest to
the deadline. So, we look at the slack how
much time we can effort to delay start in
my job, d j minus t j and pick those which
have the smallest slack. So, here we have
a very similar example to the first one, except
that the deadline of the first job which now
2.
So, here we have slack 0 for the second job
and slack 1 first job, so the second one has
the deadline equal to it is time, the first
one has the deadline which is one more that
its time. So, then by this strategy we would
pick t 2 first and if you pick t 2 followed
by t 1, then what happens is that this lateness
is going to be 11 minus 2, because we first
to t 2. So, we start t 1 a job 1 only a time
11, so it finishes the time 11, but it should
have finish 2, so the lateness is 9.
On the other hand, if we do t 1 followed by
t 2, then we have that the lateness is just
1, because of the second job should have finished
at 10 instead it finishes at 11. So, 11 minus
10 is 1, so now here although our intuition
told us to pick this smallest slack time actually
that is not the good one.
So, turns out that a greedy strategy that
does work is to choose the job with earliest
deadline d of j first, the challenge is to
prove that this strategy is in fact correct.
So, to prove that is correct we will first
assume that we have actually numbered all
our jobs in order of deadline. So, we number
our jobs 1, 2, 3 up to n, so let that the
deadline of 1 is less then or equal to deadline
of 2 and so on. Now, having done this our
schedule is very straight forward, we just
schedule job 1 first, then job 2, then job
3 and so on. So, we do not have do anything,
once we have sorted the jobs by deadline,
we just schedule them in that order to the
job 1 starts that time 0 which will call as
set 1, it ends at f of 1 which is t of 1 0
plus t of 1.
Now, s 2 the starting time for job 2 is as
soon as job 1 ends, so at f 1 we start job
2 and it will end at s 2 plus t 2. So, likewise
now s 3 will be f 2, we will start job 3 at
time t 2 and we will go on to s 3 plus t 3
and call this f 3. So, we will just schedule
each job as soon as the previous one ends
in this deadline order.
So, since we are scheduling jobs one after
the other without waiting, it is very clear
that this schedule has no gaps, it has no
idle time. The resource that we are trying
to allocate is continuously in use, until
all n requests are finished. So, now the claim
is that there is an optimum schedule which
has no idle time, because suppose you had
an optimum schedule in which you have blocks
like this where the resources is being used
and there were these gapes in between which
were idle.
It is, very clear that I can shift these things
forward, look at this, there is no constraint
on when I can skip to this, I only have a
constraint on when thing should finish. So,
when moving things earlier I can only reduce
the lateness, so if the blue schedule with
gaps was optimal, I can move it, so that it
does not have gaps and certainly my new schedule
will have no more lateness in the blue one.
Therefore, we can always assume that optimum
schedule has no idle time.
So, now our goal is to actually argue that
this schedule that we have produced by sorting
in terms of deadlines and then using that
order blindly,is as could as any optimum schedule.
So, here in the previous interval scheduling
problem, we said that we would not be able
to guarantee that schedule that we found is
equal to a given optimum schedule, but we
will just show that there are of same size.
Now, here what we do slightly different, we
will take an optimum schedule which is produced
by some other strategy and we will step by
step transform it into one that is the same
as one that we have produced.
So, this is what is called an exchange argument,
we start with some schedule and then we keep
moving things around in that schedule preserving
optimality, until eventually we transform
the given schedule O into our schedule A,
which would get among greedy strategy.
So, our strategy processes and schedules jobs
in order of deadlines, so we can say that
this schedule O, the optimum schedule has
an inversion, if it actually has two jobs
which appear out of order within deadline.
So, there is a job i which appears before
jobs j and O, but the deadline of j is strictly
before the deadline of i. So, notice that
our solution, because the greedy solution
processes things in deadline order, there
cannot be any inversions in our schedule,
but the optimum schedule the arbitrary optimum
schedule that we have presented with may well
have inversions.
So, now the first point is that if you have
no inversions and no idle time, then the lateness
must be the same. So, first of all if you
have no inversions and no idle time then the
only flexibility we have is to reorder, because
we not allowed to put things with later deadlines
ahead of things with earlier deadlines. The
only flexibility we have is to reorder the
things with the same deadline, we may have
multiple jobs within the same deadline and
we could pick different sequential iterations
or different reordering of these same deadlines,
they would not violate inversions, because
they are equal.
But, inversions happens only when we have
something strictly smaller coming after something
that is strictly bigger. So, the claim is
that in such a situation, we cannot have a
different answer, because of even if you allow
our self to shuffle jobs in same deadline.
So, here is a picture, so suppose these three
jobs, the blue job, in the yellow job, the
red job all have the same dead line. So, here
is one sequence where we do blue first, then
yellow, then red here is some another sequence,
so we do red first, then blue then yellow.
Now, all have the same deadline, so the same
deadline is at this point. So, deadline is
here, now the last of these jobs regardless
of how we shuffle them will end the same point.
Because, we have the total the sum of the
times and that will be the end and the last
job will have among these, the maximum delay
with respect to this deadline.
So, since we have counting the maximum lateness,
the maximum lateness cannot change regardless
of how I shuffle these jobs, which ever jobs
ends last will end at the same time, because
all of these are of the same length, I mean
the sum of the these are same length regardless
of how I shuffle them. And therefore, the
lateness does not change, so in somebody if
you have two schedules which have more inversions
and no idle time, then the answer in terms
of the lateness we produce is the same.
So, now if you can claim that there is an
optimum schedule with no inversions or no
idle time. Now, recall that our schedule A
has this property; A has no inversions by
construction and no idle time. And now I am
going to claim that there is an optimum schedule,
we going to start with O and we are going
to produce from this some O prime which has
no inversions, no idle time. And by the previous
remark, since O prime and A both have no inversions
no idle time, they must actually produce the
same lateness.
So, how do we do this? So, first of all we
know that we can assume that the optimum schedule
has no idle time. Because, we already said
that idle time is useless we can always shift
anything left, compress out the gaps, so that
there is no idle time. So, the first observation
is that now we have no idle time, so one part
of this requirement is assumed, so the only
thing that we have to worry about is inversions.
So, the first claim is that if O has an inversion,
then in fact we have an inversion among two
consecutive elements, there is a pair of jobs
i and j such that j is immediately after i,
but the deadline of j is smaller than the
deadline of i. So, we have something with
a smaller deadline which comes later than
something to the bigger deadline and this
is very clear, because if there is an inversion,
then the deadlines normally will keep increasing
and then somewhere this is an inversion, so
it comes down.
So, at the point where it comes down, we must
have two adjacent things, where the bigger
one comes before the smaller one. So, whenever
we have an inversion anywhere in the sequence,
we can find some point where two consecutive
items have an inversion.
Now, the next observation is that we can remove
this inversion by swapping these two jobs.
So, we have i and j which has an inversion,
then if we exchange i and j that is we put
j before i, then now d of j is less than d
of i and this inversion is gone. So, it is
obvious that why we remove the inversion.
But, what is now the obvious is that this
operation of removing this inversion by swapping
these consecutive jobs which are out of order
will actually not affect the quality of this
notion.
So, what we need to ask is whether after swapping
i and j we get a solution whose maximum lateness
is no larger than that of O. So, we have an
optimum solution, we have an inversion and
an adjacent consecutive inversion, we want
to undo this inversion by swapping those two
consecutive elements, but we do not want to
change the optimality.
So, this can again we seen by a diagram, so
remember that this inversion said that i came
before j, but d of j was strictly less then
d of i which is why it was an description.
So, we have this kind of situation, so we
had some history this blue history and then
at this point we had i and then j. So, this
is my original and now I am going to go from
go to O prime by exchanging j and i
So, now observe that d of j is to the left
of d of i by a assumption, so d of j strictly
less then d of i. So, now let us look at the
lateness of j, so it is from the ends i plus
j take the same amount of time, whether I
do i before j or j before i. So, if I look
from the deadline of j up to where j ends
then this length, this lateness must be more
then the lateness below cannot be the less
then. Because d of i is strictly to the right
of d of j and the end point is the same.
So, if I look at the n point and subtract
the deadline point, the deadline point for
i is closure to the n, then the deadline point
for j, because d j is before d 1. So, therefore
by exchanging i and j not only have an a move
on inversions have also guaranteed that because
of this notice that late no other job, every
other job up to this point ends at the same
time when the every time which is the after
this point also end the same point.
So, no other job has is lateness affected
by the soft only to jobs who lateness changes
or i and j by the change in such a way that
the overall lateness then only reduce, it
cannot increase. So, therefore this is the
safe soft in terms of preserving optimality.
So, therefore now we come back to our claim
that there is an optimum schedule with no
inversions and no idle time, we know that
we have an optimum schedule with no idle time,
because that general principle. Now, from
the previous argument we can remove every
consecutive inversion without increasing lateness.
Therefore, the optimality is preserved, now
if you have n jobs even if a every pair of
them is out of order, we have only n to n
minus 2 1 by 2 inversions to begins with.
So, we can systematical inverts every one
of them, without affecting optimality, until
we get an optimum schedule with no inversions
and no idle time. And we already saw that
any two schedules is no inversions and no
idle time must be equivalent terms of lateness.
Therefore, our schedule A which has the property
that it has no inversions and no idle time
as the same lateness as this transformed version
of O at since a transformed version of O has
the same lateness O itself and O is optimal
our algorithm our solution A is also optimal.
So, the trick in this problem was to actually
prove that the greedy strategies was correct,
the implementation and the complexity are
very easy to calculate, we just have to sort
the job is by deadline and then read out in
this schedule in the same order. So, sorting
the jobs takes n log in is usual and reading
of this schedule just takes order n time,
because we just we read out jobs 1 to n after
they are sorted. So, overall we have and n
log n algorithm.